>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, APRIL 23: POLICE
INVESTIGATE A PAIR OF MASS
SHOOTINGS IN OHIO AND IN
GEORGIA.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
GOVERNMENTS AND PRIVATE
INDUSTRY PARTNER TO BUILD NEW
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND, HOW MUSICIAN JON CLEARY
MADE NEW ORLEANS HIS HOME.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
POLICE IN TWO STATES ARE
SEARCHING FOR ANSWERS IN TWO
MASS SHOOTINGS THAT OCCURRED IN
THE PAST 24 HOURS.
IN OHIO, POLICE ARE LOOKING FOR
THE KILLER OR KILLERS OF EIGHT
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY WHO
WERE KILLED YESTERDAY IN FOUR
SEPARATE HOMES IN RURAL PIKE
COUNTY, WHICH LIES BETWEEN
COLUMBUS AND CINCINNATI.
POLICE SAY THE VICTIMS-- SEVEN
ADULTS AND ONE TEENAGER-- WERE
SHOT IN THE HEAD AT CLOSE RANGE
EXECUTION-STYLE, SOME WHILE
THEY SLEPT.
ONE WOMAN WAS SHOT IN HER BED
WITH A NEWBORN BESIDE HER.
THAT BABY, ANOTHER INFANT, AND A
TODDLER FOUND IN THE HOMES WERE
NOT SHOT.
>> NEVER HAVE I-- NEVER IMAGINED
SUCH DEVASTATION TO THE FAMILY,
TO THE COUNTY.
>> Thompson: IN GEORGIA, POLICE
SAY A GUNMAN SHOT AND KILLED
FIVE PEOPLE LAST NIGHT-- TWO MEN
AND THREE WOMEN-- IN THEIR HOMES
IN THE CITY OF APPLING, OUTSIDE
AUGUSTA.
POLICE SAY THEY FOUND THE GUNMAN
THIS MORNING, DEAD FROM A SELF-
INFLICTED GUNSHOT WOUND.
POLICE SAY SOME OF THE VICTIMS
BELONGED TO HIS WIFE'S FAMILY,
AND THEY BELIEVE THE SHOOTINGS
AROSE FROM A DOMESTIC DISPUTE.
A DAUGHTER OF THE ALLEGED GUNMAN
SAID TODAY HER FATHER WAS A
"TICKING TIME BOMB."
PRESIDENT OBAMA WRAPPED UP A
TWO-DAY VISIT TO BRITAIN TODAY,
HOSTING A TOWN HALL WITH
HUNDREDS OF BRITISH YOUTH.
THE PRESIDENT ASKED THEM TO VIEW
INTEGRATION AND GLOBALIZATION
"NOT AS THREATS, BUT AS
OPPORTUNITIES."
HE ALSO URGED THE BRITISH TO
VOTE IN A JUNE REFERENDUM TO
STAY IN THE 28-NATION EUROPEAN
UNION.
>> AND I WANT YOU TO TAKE A
LONGER AND MORE OPTIMISTIC
VIEW OF HISTORY AND THE PART
THAT YOU CAN PLAY IN IT.
>> Thompson: AHEAD OF THE
PRESIDENT'S VISIT TO A TRADE
SHOW IN HANOVER, GERMANY,
TOMORROW, 40,000 PEOPLE TODAY
PROTESTED A PROPOSED U.S.-
EUROPEAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TOLD A GERMAN
NEWSPAPER TODAY THE AGREEMENT
WOULD CREATE JOBS ON BOTH
CONTINENTS.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO CALLED THE
RECENT E.U. DEAL TO DEPORT
REFUGEES DENIED ASYLUM TO
TURKEY, A STEP TOWARD A MORE
EQUITABLE "SHARING OF
RESPONSIBILITY" FOR THE CRISIS,
ADDING MIGRANTS' HUMAN RIGHTS
MUST BE UPHELD.
FACING CRITICISM THAT THE
MIGRANT DEAL SHE BROKERED IS
MOVING TOO SLOWLY, TODAY GERMAN
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL VISITED
A CAMP ON THE TURKEY-SYRIA
BORDER THAT IS A MAIN ENTRY
POINT FOR SYRIAN WAR REFUGEES.
MERKEL, EUROPEAN COUNCIL
PRESIDENT DONALD TUSK, AND
TURKEY'S PRIME MINISTER VISITED
A GOVERNMENT-RUN CAMP NEAR
GAZIANTEP THAT HOUSES 5,000
REFUGEES.
THERE ARE 2.7 MILLION SYRIANS
LIVING IN TURKEY, MORE THAN ANY
OTHER COUNTRY OUTSIDE SYRIA.
THE E.U. HAS PROMISED TURKEY
$7 BILLION IN AID OVER THE NEXT
FOUR YEARS TO HANDLE REFUGEES
AND ACCEPT REJECTED ASYLUM
SEEKERS.
THE GROUP "HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH"
SAYS MERKEL SHOULD RETHINK
THE ENTIRE DEAL, WHICH IT CALLS
FLAWED AND CLAIMS TURKEY IS
REFUSING TO ADMIT THOUSANDS OF
SYRIANS FLEEING THEIR CIVIL WAR.
>> Thompson: OFFICIALS IN
ECUADOR SAY THE MASSIVE
EARTHQUAKE ONE WEEK AGO TODAY
HAS KILLED AT LEAST 600 PEOPLE,
INJURED MORE THAN 4,500 OTHERS
AND LEFT 25,000 PEOPLE HOMELESS.
80% OF THE COASTAL CITY OF
PEDERNALES, THE QUAKE'S
EPICENTER, IS SAID TO BE IN
RUINS.
BEYOND THE HUMAN COST OF THE
TRAGEDY, ECUADOR NOW FACES A
STRUGGLE TO FIND THE FUNDS TO
REBUILD.
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
SARA SCHAEFER MUNOZ HAS BEEN
REPORTING FROM ECUADOR THIS WEEK
AND JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
BOGOTA, COLOMBIA.
SARAH, I UNDERSTAND YOU'VE BEEN
TRAVELING AROUND ECUADOR.
CAN YOU TELL ME WHAT HAVE YOU
SEEN?
THERE'S A LOT OF DEVASTATION,
ESPECIALLY ALONG THE COASTAL
AREAS.
THAT'S WHERE THE EPICENTER OF
THE QUAKE WAS.
AND THERE WERE A LOT OF SMALL
CITIES THAT STARTED OUT REALLY
10, 15 YEARS AGO AS THESE SMALL
FISHING VILLAGES THAT HAVE GROWN
INTO TOURIST HUBS.
UNFORTUNATELY, AFTER THE QUAKE,
7.8 MAGNITUDE A WEEK AGO, THESE
CITIES ARE NOW LEFT ALMOST IN
RUINS.
IN PEDERNALES, 80% OF THE-- OF
BUILDINGS ARE DESTROYED.
AND THE MAYOR HAS TOLD ME,
YOU KNOW, NOW WE'RE JUST GOING
TO BASICALLY HAVE TO START AGAIN
FROM ZERO."
>> Thompson: HOW IS THE
DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD, WATER AND
OTHER EMERGENCY SUPPLIES GOING?
>> INITIALLY, IT WAS ALL RIGHT.
THE FIRST DAY OR TWO FOOD SEEMED
TO BE GETTING THERE, WATER
SEEMED TO BE GETTING THERE FROM
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND DONATIONS.
BUT THE LAST COUPLE OF DAYS
THERE ARE SEVERE DELAYS.
MANY PEOPLE NOW ARE BEING LEFT
WITHOUT SUPPLIES, EVEN THOUGH
THERE ARE PLENTY OF SUPPLIES
COMING INTO THE COUNTRY.
>> Thompson: ECUADOR'S ECONOMY
WAS IN A DOWNTURN BEFORE THE
QUAKE.
CAN YOU TALK ABOUT WHAT WAS
BEHIND THAT AND HOW IT IS GOING
TO AFFECT THAT NATION'S ABILITY
TO PAY FOR RECOVERY?
>> THIS COULD NOT HAVE COME AT A
WORST TIME FOR ECUADOR.
IT WAS ALREADY UNDERGOING A
PRETTY MAJOR FINANCIAL CRISIS.
AFTER GROWING AS MUCH AS 4% A
YEAR UNDER THE PAST DECADE UNDER
THE ADMINISTRATION OF PRESIDENT
CORREA, AND HIGH OIL PRICES, IT
IS NOW FACING A CRACKS OF 4.6%
THIS YEAR.
SO ECUADOR WAS ALREADY ON THE
BRINK OF A PRETTY SEVERE
ECONOMIC CRISIS WHEN THE
EARTHQUAKE STRUCK, WHICH IS
GOING TO MAKE REBUILDING EVEN
MORE COSTLY, MORE DIFFICULT, AND
CAN TAKE QUITE A LONG TIME.
>> Thompson: I UNDERSTAND THAT
THE PRESIDENT HAS PROPOSED-- OR
IMPOSED A NEW TAX TO HELP PAY
FOR THE RECOVERY.
YOU CAN TALK ABOUT HIS PLAN, AND
HOW IS THAT BEING RECEIVED BY
THE PUBLIC?
>> ON WEDNESDAY NIGHT, PRESIDENT
CORREA ANNOUNCED A TAX SAYING
ALL ECUADORIANS HAVE TO SHOULDER
THE BURDEN OF THIS EARTHQUAKE.
IT SHOULDN'T BE
DISPROPORTIONATELY PLACED ON THE
PEOPLE OF THE COASTAL AREA.
HE SAID FAIR YEAR HE'S ANYTHING
TO RAISE SALES TAX FROM 12% TO
14% AND EVERYBODY HAS TO GIVE A
PERCENTAGE OF THEIR WAGES,
DEPENDING ON HOW MUCH THEY MAKE.
BUT THE TAXES WERE NOT VERY WELL
RECEIVED.
JUST YESTERDAY, THE MAYOR A
MAJOR PORT CITY ALONG THE COAST,
SAID IF THE COUNTRY WEREN'T IN
SUCH AN ECONOMIC CRISIS, THE
TAXES WOULD MAKE SENSE, BUT ALL
THIS IS GOING TO DO IS SHOW THE
ECONOMY EVEN MORE.
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO CONSUME
LESS, BUY LESS, AND SO FORTH.
SO HE WAS HIGH CRITICAL OF THE
MOVE.
>> Thompson: ALL RIGHT, SARA
SCHAEFER MUNOZ FROM THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL," THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Thompson: ESTIMATES OF THE
SPENDING NEEDED TO FIX AMERICA'S
INFRASTRUCTURE RUN INTO THE
TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
YET IN THE PAST DECADE, STATE
AND LOCAL SPENDING ON
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS HAS
DECLINED 13%, ACCORDING TO THE
PEW CHARITABLE TRUSTS.
AND FEDERAL SPENDING ON
TRANSPORTATION-- FINANCED BY THE
GAS TAX-- HAS BEEN LIMITED, IN
PART BECAUSE THE TAX HAS NOT
BEEN RAISED FROM 18 CENTS A
GALLON IN 20 YEARS.
SO, HOW DO BIG ROAD, BRIDGE AND
TUNNELS GET BUILT AND PAID FOR?
INCREASINGLY, STATE GOVERNMENTS
ARE TURNING TO PUBLIC-PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIPS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER WENT TO VIRGINIA TO SEE
HOW THIS MODEL HAS FARED IN ONE
OF THE NATION'S BIGGEST
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS.
>> Reporter: RESIDENTS OF
PORTSMOUTH AND NORFOLK,
VIRGINIA, HAVE GROWN ACCUSTOMED
TO THEIR MORNING RUSH HOUR
TRAFFIC.
>> AND IT'S STARTING TO PICK-UP
HERE EASTBOUND AT THE DOWNTOWN
TUNNEL, AND BACK UP ON THE
PORTSMOUTH SIDE.
>> Reporter: FOR COMMUTERS
MOVING BETWEEN THE TWO PORT
CITIES, THERE'S A DAILY CHOKE OF
CARS LEADING INTO THIS 54-YEAR-
OLD TUNNEL WITH ONLY ONE LANE
RUNNING IN EACH DIRECTION UNDER
THE ELIZABETH RIVER.
SINCE IT OPENED, THE TUNNEL'S
DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUME HAS
TRIPLED.
FOR THE PAST FOUR YEARS, WADE
WATSON HAS OVERSEEN CONSTRUCTION
OF THE RELIEF VALVE, A NEW
MIDTOWN TUNNEL WITH TWO
ADDITIONAL LANES RUNNING
PARALLEL TO THE OLD ONES.
THIS NEW TUNNEL IS ON SCHEDULE
TO OPEN LATER THIS YEAR,
FOLLOWING AN INNOVATIVE APPROACH
TO ITS DESIGN.
>> THERE'S ABOUT 80,000 CUBIC
YARDS OF CONCRETE IN THIS
TUNNEL.
>> Reporter: THE TUNNEL IS
DESIGNED TO LAST 120 YEARS, AND
IT WAS LESS EXPENSIVE THAN
TRADITIONAL STEEL TUBE
CONSTRUCTION.
NEARLY A MILE LONG, THIS ALL-
CONCRETE TUNNEL IS ONLY THE
SECOND OF ITS KIND IN THE UNITED
STATES.
CONSISTING OF 11 DIFFERENT
SEGMENTS, EACH SECTION WAS
FABRICATED JUST OUTSIDE OF
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND, BEFORE
BEING SHIPPED DOWN THE
CHESAPEAKE BAY TO THE ELIZABETH
RIVER.
THEN, THOSE 11 CONCRETE
SECTIONS-- EACH AS LONG AS A
FOOTBALL FIELD-- WERE SUBMERGED
UNDERWATER AND CONNECTED ACROSS
THE DREDGED RIVER BED.
>> SO ACTUALLY, IF YOU WENT DOWN
AND LOOKED AT THE BOTTOM OF THE
RIVER AFTER WE FINISHED YOU
WOULDN'T SEE THE TUNNEL.
IT'S BURIED ON THE BOTTOM.
>> Reporter: WHAT ALSO SETS THIS
TUNNEL APART IS HOW THE
FINANCIAL PIECES WERE ASSEMBLED.
TO MAKE THIS PROJECT HAPPEN,
THE STATE OF VIRGINIA ENTERED
INTO A PUBLIC-PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP.
OFTEN CALLED "P-3s," THESE
DEALS ARE CONTRACTS BETWEEN
GOVERNMENTS AND THE PRIVATE
SECTOR TO PRODUCE, REPAIR OR
REPLACE A PUBLIC ASSET, LIKE A
ROAD, BRIDGE OR TUNNEL.
UNLIKE TRADITIONAL
INFRASTRUCTURE DEALS, THE
PRIVATE PARTNERS CAN INVEST
EQUITY IN THE PROJECT, AND BY
TAKING ON THIS RISK, THEY CAN
EARN LUCRATIVE RETURNS.
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, PUBLIC-
PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS NOW ACCOUNT
FOR ABOUT $39 BILLION OF ROADS,
BRIDGES AND TUNNELS GREEN-LIT
BETWEEN 2005 AND 2014.
WHILE THAT'S A SMALL FRACTION OF
TOTAL U.S. INFRASTRUCTURE
DEVELOPMENT, 31 STATES AS WELL
AS PUERTO RICO AND WASHINGTON
D.C., HAVE ENACTED STATUTES
ALLOWING P-3 FOR INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS.
WHILE EACH P-3 DEAL IS UNIQUE,
THE PRIVATE PARTNERS CAN BE
INVOLVED EVERY PHASE-- FINANCE,
DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION,
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION.
THAT'S WHAT HAPPENED WITH
VIRGINIA'S NEW MIDTOWN TUNNEL IN
A 58-YEAR AGREEMENT.
A COALITION LED BY SWEDEN-BASED
SKANSKA AND AUSTRALIAN FINANCIER
MacQUARIE FORMED A CONSORTIUM
CALLED "ELIZABETH RIVER
CROSSINGS."
IN ADDITION TO BUILDING THE NEW
TUNNEL, E.R.C. WOULD REFURBISH
THE OLD MIDTOWN TUNNEL-- THE ONE
WITH ALL THAT TRAFFIC-- FIX
ANOTHER TUNNEL IN NORFOLK, AND
EXTEND A NEARBY EXPRESSWAY THAT
CONNECTS THE TUNNELS.
ACCORDING TO THE BUILDERS, THE
BUDGET IS JUST OVER $2 BILLION.
VIRGINIA ISSUED $638 MILLION IN
BONDS AND PAID ANOTHER $421
MILLION IN STATE FUNDS.
THE FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION LOANED $441
MILLION.
SKANSKA AND MacQUARIE INVESTED
ABOUT $200 MILLION.
THE REST, ABOUT $300 MILLION,
WOULD COME FROM TOLLS.
RICHARD CAVALLARO IS PRESIDENT
OF SKANSKA U.S.A.
>> THE QUESTION WOULD BE, CAN
THE STATE HAVE AFFORDED TO BUILD
THE PROJECT WITHOUT COLLECTING
TOLLS BASED ON THEIR OWN BUDGET?
AND THE ANSWER IS NO.
SO THAT'S THE REAL RUB.
IT'S NOT SO MUCH THE PROCESS.
IT'S HOW THEY'RE RECOUPING THE
PAYMENT.
AND THAT EXISTS IF IT WAS
TRIPLE-P OR NOT.
>> Reporter: THE ORIGINAL
PROPOSAL CALLED FOR A TOLL
BETWEEN $2 AND $3, BUT WHEN THE
DEAL WAS SIGNED IN 2011, THAT
WAS LOWERED TO $1.84 FOR USE
DURING PEAK HOURS.
THEN, ELIZABETH RIVER CROSSINGS
WAS AUTHORIZED TO START
COLLECTING TOLLS ON THE OLD
TUNNEL WHILE BUILDING THE NEW
ONE, TO GENERATE $150 MILLION
DURING THE CONSTRUCTION PHASE.
ELIZABETH RIVER CROSSINGS AGREED
TO A FIXED PRICE FOR THE PROJECT
AND ASSUMES THE RISK OF HIGHER
CONSTRUCTION COSTS, LOWER TOLL
REVENUE AND UNANTICIPATED
MAINTENANCE COSTS.
>> THE RISK TRANSFER IN THESE
JOBS IS GIGANTIC.
I MEAN, THE STATE IS GETTING A
PRICE CERTAINTY ON SCHEDULE,
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE, OPERATIONAL
EXPENDITURE, AT A VERY EARLY
STAGE.
SOMETIMES I'M NOT SURE PEOPLE
REALLY UNDERSTAND THAT RISK
TRANSFER'S A BIG, BIG DEAL.
>> THIS WAS A HORRIBLE DEAL FOR
TAXPAYERS.
>> Reporter: VIRGINIA GOVERNOR
TERRY McAULIFFE INHERITED THE
PROJECT FROM HIS PREDECESSOR.
>> EXORBITANT TOLLS TO THE TOLL
RIDERS, TO THE TAXPAYERS OF THE
COMMONWEALTH, START IMMEDIATELY
EVEN BEFORE ANY CAPACITY WAS
CREATED.
CREATED SUCH AN UPROAR.
SO I CUT THE TOLLS IN HALF.
I HAD TO BUY DOWN THE TOLLS.
>> Reporter: McAULIFFE LOWERED
THE TUNNEL TOLLS BY ABOUT 80
CENTS AND ELIMINATED THEM
ENTIRELY FOR THE NEW EXPRESSWAY.
TO REIMBURSE E.R.C. FOR THE LOST
TOLL REVENUE, THE STATE IS
EXPECTED TO CONTRIBUTE CLOSE TO
$200 MILLION.
ELIZABETH RIVER CROSSINGS CAN
INCREASE FUTURE TOLLS UP TO 3.5%
EVERY YEAR.
>> I MEAN, CAN YOU IMAGINE WHAT
THAT TOLL'S GOING TO LOOK LIKE
IN ANOTHER FIVE YEARS, ANOTHER
TEN YEARS?
>> Reporter: PORTSMOUTH MAYOR
KEN WRIGHT SAYS EVEN WITH THE
REDUCTION, THE TOLLS HURT HIS
CONSTITUENTS.
>> WE'VE GOT A GREAT DEAL OF OUR
CITIZENS THAT ARE MAKING MINIMUM
WAGE THAT ARE WORKING IN HOTELS
AND RESTAURANTS OVER IN NORFOLK
AND VIRGINIA BEACH.
AND THEY HAVE TO TRAVEL THROUGH
THOSE TUNNELS EVERY DAY.
AND SO YOU IMAGINE SOMEONE ONLY
MAKING $15,000 TO $20,000 A
YEAR, WHICH IS ALREADY A
DEPRESSING NUMBER, AND THEN
HAVING TO GIVE UP $1,000 OF THAT
IN A TOLL.
>> Reporter: MAYOR WRIGHT
REFUSES TO DRIVE THE TOLL ROAD,
AND SOME PORTSMOUTH RESIDENTS
FELT SO STRONGLY THE TOLLS WERE
UNFAIR, THEY SUED THE STATE.
IN 2013, A CIRCUIT COURT JUDGE
DEEMED THE TOLLS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, BUT THE
VIRGINIA SUPREME COURT REVERSED
THE RULING, ALLOWING TOLLING TO
START IN EARLY 2014.
NORFOLK MAYOR PAUL FRAIM FINDS
FAULT WITH ANOTHER PART OF THE
58-YEAR DEAL, A NON-COMPETE
CLAUSE SAYING SKANSKA AND
MacQUARIE ARE ENTITLED TO
COMPENSATION IF VIRGINIA BUILDS
OTHER ROADWAYS THAT REDUCE
TUNNEL TRAFFIC AND REVENUE.
>> WE'RE WORKING HARD NOW TO
BUILD ANOTHER RIVER CROSSING UP
AT THE HAMPTON ROADS.
THAT DEAL TIED OUR HANDS FOR
SOME CONSTRUCTION OF WATER
CROSSINGS, AS FAR AS THE COST OF
IT IS CONCERNED, FOR A HALF
CENTURY.
SO THIS, I MEAN, THIS IS WITHOUT
ANY QUESTION THE WORST ROAD DEAL
THAT WE'VE-- TUNNEL DEAL THAT WE
HAVE SEEN HERE IN EASILY THE
LAST HALF-CENTURY.
OR REALLY, LONGER.
>> Reporter: ELIZABETH RIVER
CROSSINGS IS SUBJECT TO
PENALTIES IF IT MISSES
CONSTRUCTION DEADLINES-- IT
HASN'T.
AND IF IT FAILS TO CONSISTENTLY
MAINTAIN THE TUNNELS, THE STATE
CAN TERMINATE ITS CONTRACT.
THE DEAL ALLOWS E.R.C. TO EARN
AS MUCH AS 13.5% A YEAR ON ITS
INVESTMENT.
EVEN WITH THE SECOND-GUESSING
AND POLITICAL FALLOUT OVER THE
AGREEMENT, VIRGINIA IS NOT
DITCHING THE P-3 MODEL.
>> WE DON'T BLAME THE PRIVATE
PARTIES.
>> Reporter: AUBREY LAYNE IS
GOVERNOR McAULIFFE'S SECRETARY
OF TRANSPORTATION.
>> ABSOLUTELY, P-3s ARE A BIG
PART OF OUR PROCUREMENT.
THE PRIVATE SECTOR, I BELIEVE,
HAS THE EDGE AND CAN DO IT IN
CONSTRUCTING, PROBABLY IN
OPERATING, BUT NOT AN EDGE IN
FINANCING.
WHAT WE SHOULD'VE DONE AND WHAT
WE DO NOW IS, "HERE'S WHAT THE
PROJECT SHOULD BE FROM A PUBLIC
POLICY STANDPOINT.
HERE'S THE INFRASTRUCTURE
NEEDED, HERE'S WHAT WE CAN BUILD
IT FOR."
NOW, FROM THAT PROJECT, LET'S GO
TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND SAY,
"HEY, CAN YOU IMPROVE ON THIS?
AND IF YOU CAN, WE'D LOVE TO
PARTNER WITH YOU."
>> Reporter: THIS IS REALLY
GETTING TO THE HEART OF THAT
QUESTION THAT AS A CITIZENRY
WE'RE HAVING KIND OF A LOUDER
CONVERSATION WHEN IT COMES TO
WHAT WE PAY FOR NOW AND WILL WE
PAY FOR IT LATER.
>> COULDN'T AGREE MORE.
WE'VE BEEN LULLED INTO THINKING
THAT ONCE YOU BUILD
INFRASTRUCTURE, YOU'RE DONE.
AND NOW WE'VE GOTTEN TO THE
POINT, WE'VE GOT TUNNELS AND
INTERSTATES THAT ARE 60 YEARS
OLD THAT, YES, YOU PAVE THEM
ONCE IN A WHILE, BUT THE
INFRASTRUCTURE'S GOT TO BE
REDONE.
>> Reporter: FOLLOWING REFORMS
TO THEIR P-3 PROCESS THAT
INCREASES GUIDELINES AND
TRANSPARENCY, THE STATE IS NOW
CONSIDERING BIDS FROM THE
PRIVATE SECTOR TO EXPAND A
SECTION OF INTERSTATE 66 OUTSIDE
OF WASHINGTON D.C.
THE STATE IS EXPECTED TO
ANNOUNCE THE CONTRACT WINNER
THIS FALL.
SKANSKA IS AMONG THE BIDDERS.
CAVALLARO SAYS WHILE THE COMPANY
IS DEEPLY INVOLVED IN P-3
PROJECTS ABROAD, THE U.S. IS A
RELATIVELY NEW MARKET.
>> THERE'S A REAL PIPELINE OF
PROJECTS NOW THAT MANY, MANY
STATES HAVE A SOLID PROCESS.
THEY PUT OUT PROJECTS.
THERE ARE MORE P-3 PROJECTS OUT
THERE TO BID THAN WE COULD
ACTUALLY BID.
>> Reporter: AND WITH THE P-3,
THE KIND OF TOP LINE ARGUMENTS
ARE CHEAPER, FASTER AND
INNOVATIVE?
>> DEFINITELY FROM INCEPTION TO
FACILITY AND SERVICE, THERE'S NO
QUESTION, UNDISPUTABLE.
IT IS-- IT IS QUICKER.
AND WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT THE
COST OF INFLATION AND
ESCALATIONS OVER A-- TIME
PERIOD, THAT'S A SIGNIFICANT
SAVINGS.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, SKANSKA
WAS PART OF A GROUP AWARDED A
$3.6 BILLION P-3 CONTRACT TO
REBUILD THE MAIN TERMINAL OF NEW
YORK'S LaGUARDIA AIRPORT.
THIS BRIDGE OVER THE OHIO RIVER
CONNECTING JEFFERSONVILLE,
INDIANA, TO LOUISVILLE,
KENTUCKY, AND DUE TO OPEN LATER
THIS YEAR, IS ALSO A P-3.
SO IS MIAMI'S TUNNEL, FROM ITS
PORT TO THE INTERSTATE, WHICH
OPENED TWO YEARS AGO.
ARE YOU GETTING INCREASED CALLS
FROM OTHER GOVERNORS FOR ADVICE?
OTHER STATES THAT ARE LOOKING TO
ENTER THIS SPACE?
AND IF SO, WHAT ARE YOU TELLING
THEM?
>> I DO START OUT BY SAYING,
"YES, WE HAVE BEEN A LEADER ON
P-3s.
BUT IN FAIRNESS, WE'VE ALSO MADE
OUR MISTAKES WITH P-3s.
GO INTO IT VERY CAREFULLY."
STATES ARE STRAPPED FOR MONEY.
THEY THINK P-3s ARE THE GREAT
ANSWER.
THEY MIGHT BE, BUT THEY MIGHT
NOT BE.
>> Reporter: DOES THIS REPRESENT
A SHIFT WITHIN THE WAY WE GOVERN
AND THE WAY WE THINK ABOUT
GOVERNMENT?
>> I LIKE IT BECAUSE YOU'RE
BRINGING THE BUSINESS SECTOR IN.
AND I ALWAYS THINK, YOU KNOW,
IT'S IMPORTANT FOR BUSINESS TO
HAVE A REASONABLE PROFIT.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT IF YOU
CAN HAVE A BUSINESS IN.
I THINK THAT HELPS.
BUT IF YOU CAN EXTEND OUT AND
GET MORE BANG FOR YOUR BUCK, AND
I CAN GET MORE TRANSPORTATION
DONE BY BRINGING THE PRIVATE
SECTOR IN, WHERE I'VE PROTECTED
THE TAXPAYERS ON THE RISK PIECE,
WE'VE DONE THE TRANSFER OF RISK,
AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR CAN MAKE
A REASONABLE PROFIT, THAT'S A
WIN/WIN FOR EVERYBODY.
>> SHOULD THE U.S. TURN TO THE
PRIVATE SECTOR TO BUILD AND
REPAIR INFRASTRUCTURE?
LET US KNOW WHAT YOU THINK ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE AT
www.facebook.com/newshour.
>> Thompson: NEW ORLEANS IS THE
BIRTHPLACE OF AMERICAN JAZZ, AND
ONE FIXTURE IN THE CITY'S MUSIC
SCENE IS PIANO PLAYER AND SINGER
JON CLEARY.
CLEARY, WHO RECENTLY WON A
GRAMMY AWARD, IS ONE OF THE
HEADLINERS PLAYING NEW ORLEANS
JAZZ FEST, WHICH STARTED THIS
WEEK.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MORI ROTHMAN HAS
THIS PROFILE.
>> Reporter: JON CLEARY PLAYS
NEW ORLEANS JAZZ AND FUNK LIKE A
NATIVE SON, BUT HE'S FROM MORE
THAN 4,000 MILES AWAY.
HE LEFT KENT, ENGLAND, WHEN HE
WAS 18 YEARS OLD TO PURSUE HIS
MUSICAL DREAMS.
>> I'D ALWAYS WANTED TO COME TO
NEW ORLEANS AND VISIT NEW
ORLEANS, SO I CAME HERE THINKING
I'D BE HERE FOR A COUPLE OF
WEEKS, AND THAT WAS 30-SOMETHING
YEARS AGO.
(LAUGHS)
I'M STILL HERE.
THIS IS ONE OF MY GRANDDAD'S
OLD GIG POSTERS.
MY GRANDDAD WAS A SINGER.
>> Reporter: HIS GRANDPARENTS
WERE PERFORMERS, AND HIS FATHER
PLAYED IN A BLUES AND FOLK BAND.
CLEARY LISTENED TO ALL KINDS OF
MUSIC GROWING UP, BUT AS HE
LEARNED TO PLAY THE FAMILY
PIANO, HE FELL IN LOVE WITH
AMERICAN JAZZ AND BLUES.
HOW DOES SOMEONE FROM ENGLAND
COME TO NEW ORLEANS AND MAKE A
LIFE OUT OF THIS?
>> WELL, I CAME HERE WITH NO
PLAN OTHER THAN JUST TO GET TO
NEW ORLEANS AND TRY TO FIND THE
FUNKIEST MUSIC I COULD.
>> Reporter: CLEARY'S FIRST JOB
IN NEW ORLEANS WAS PAINTING AND
CLEANING AT A FAMED LOCAL BAR,
THE MAPLE LEAF.
ONE NIGHT, WHEN THE HOUSE PIANO
PLAYER WAS LATE, CLEARY GOT HIS
FIRST BREAK: THE OWNER ASKED HIM
TO FILL IN.
>> I PLAYED ALL THE TUNES I
COULD PLAY.
AND THEN PLAYED THEM ALL OVER
AGAIN.
EVERYONE SEEMED TO DIG 'EM.
>> Reporter: CLEARY QUICKLY
ASCENDED THE NEW ORLEANS MUSIC
SCENE AND GAINED A REPUTATION AS
A SKILLED PIANIST AND ARRANGER.
HE PLAYED REGULAR CLUB GIGS AND
TOURED WITH LEGENDS LIKE ALLEN
TOUSSAINT AND BONNIE RAITT, WHO
CALLED HER FORMER KEYBOARDIST
"THE NINTH WONDER OF THE WORLD."
IT WAS AN ON THE JOB EDUCATION,
AND CLEARY CREDITS THE
MUSICIANS HE WORKED WITH FOR
HELPING HIM DEVELOP HIS OWN
SOUND.
>> THAT'S HOW THE TRADITION
CONTINUES.
BUT IT'S IMPORTANT THAT INSTEAD
OF JUST MIMICKING, THAT YOU TRY
AND TO BEST OF YOUR ABILITY,
ANYWAY, TO DO SOMETHING THAT'S
ORIGINAL.
GET YOUR GO GO JUICE.
>> Reporter: CLEARY HAS
RECORDED EIGHT ALBUMS, AND HIS
LATEST, "GO GO JUICE," WON THIS
YEAR'S GRAMMY AWARD FOR BEST
REGIONAL ROOTS ALBUM.
THE LYRICS ON THE TITLE TRACK
ARE DIRECTLY FROM THE PEOPLE OF
NEW ORLEANS, CONSISTING OF
SLANG CLEARY HEARD WHILE WALKING
AROUND THE CITY.
>> IF YOU'RE INTERESTED IN THE
MUSIC THEN YOU HAVE TO BE
SOMETHING OF A HISTORIAN.
AND YOU HAVE TO HAVE THE ABILITY
TO LOOK BACK AND AMASS AS MUCH
OF THIS AS A RICHNESS THAT THE
GENERATIONS THAT CAME BEFORE
LEFT US WITH.
>> Reporter: CLEARY'S MUSIC HAS
RESPONDED TO THE CHANGES NEW
ORLEANS HAS GONE THROUGH DURING
THE 35 YEARS HE HAS LIVED IN
THE CITY.
IN HIS COMPOSITION "BRINGING
BACK THE HOME," HE SINGS ABOUT
THE STRUGGLES AFTER HURRICANE
KATRINA.
>> "BRINGING BACK THE HOME" WAS
WRITTEN ABOUT THE WORRY THAT A
LOT OF PEOPLE HERE HAD.
THAT THE VERY PEOPLE WHO'D BEEN
DISPLACED, AND WHO INCREASINGLY
LOOK LIKE THEY'RE STILL NOT
COMING BACK, EVEN AFTER TEN
YEARS.
THIS TOWN HAS A QUITE A SAD
HISTORY IN MANY WAYS.
AND THEY'D BE JUSTIFIED IN
SINGING THE BLUES.
BUT THEY DON'T SING THE BLUES IN
NEW ORLEANS, THEY MAKE A JOYFUL
SOUND.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Thompson: THE F.B.I. HAS
UNLOCKED A SECOND iPHONE IT HAD
SUED APPLE TO OPEN.
IN A LETTER FILED IN BROOKLYN
FEDERAL COURT LAST NIGHT, THE
F.B.I. SAID IT NO LONGER NEEDED
THE COMPANY'S HELP IN GAINING
ACCESS TO A LOCKED iPHONE SEIZED
IN A DRUG CASE BECAUSE SOMEONE
CAME FORWARD WITH THE PHONE'S
PASSCODE.
THE COURT HAD RULED IN FEBRUARY
THE F.B.I. HAD NO LEGAL
AUTHORITY TO COMPEL APPLE TO
PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
THE BROOKLYN LEGAL FIGHT STARTED
BEFORE THE F.B.I. PRESSURED
APPLE TO UNLOCK THE ENCRYPTED
iPHONE BELONGING TO ONE OF THE
ISIS-INSPIRED TERRORISTS WHO
SHOT AND KILLED 14 PEOPLE LAST
DECEMBER IN SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA.
THE F.B.I. REVEALED THIS WEEK IT
PAID HACKERS MORE THAN
$1 MILLION TO ACCESS THE SAN
BERNARDINO PHONE.
A FEDERAL JUDGE IN WASHINGTON
STATE IS ALLOWING A
FIRST-OF-ITS-KIND LAWSUIT
TO PROCEED AGAINST C.I.A.
CONTRACTORS OVER THE
ALLEGED TORTURE OF TERRORISM
SUSPECTS.
THE SUIT ON BEHALF OF THE THREE
FORMER U.S. PRISONERS IN
AFGHANISTAN BLAMES TWO
PSYCHOLOGISTS WHO DESIGNED
THE HARSH INTERROGATION PROGRAM
FOR THE U.S. MILITARY, WHICH
INCLUDED SLEEP DEPRIVATION,
BEATINGS AND WATERBOARDING.
THE A.C.L.U., WHICH BROUGHT THE
SUIT, SAYS THE PRISONERS' HUMAN
RIGHTS WERE VIOLATED; ONE DIED
IN CUSTODY.
ATTORNEYS FOR THE TWO DOCTORS--
BOTH NAMED IN THE 2015 U.S.
SENATE REPORT ON TORTURE-- SAY
THEY ONLY DESIGNED THE PROGRAM
AND DID NOT CARRY IT OUT.
NORTH KOREA'S FOREIGN MINISTER
TELLS THE "ASSOCIATED PRESS" HIS
COUNTRY WOULD HALT FURTHER
NUCLEAR WEAPONS TESTS
IF THE U.S. WERE TO STOP ITS
ONGOING MILITARY EXERCISES WITH
SOUTH KOREA.
THE STATEMENT CAME THE SAME DAY
NORTH KOREA APPEARED TO LAUNCH A
BALLISTIC MISSILE FROM A
SUBMARINE.
SOUTH KOREAN DEFENSE OFFICIALS
CONFIRMED A MISSILE FIRING OFF
NORTH KOREA'S EAST COAST BUT
SAID IT FLEW FOR ONLY 18 MILES,
FAR SHORT OF ITS PROJECTED RANGE
OF ALMOST 200 MILES.
U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT SAID ANY
MISSILE TEST WOULD VIOLATE
UNITED NATIONS RESOLUTIONS, AS
HAVE NORTH KOREA'S PREVIOUS
NUCLEAR WEAPONS TESTS.
AND FINALLY, AS THE WORLD
MARKED THE 400th ANNIVERSARY
OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S DEATH
TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA VISITED
LONDON'S GLOBE THEATER, WHERE
ACTORS PERFORMED A SCENE FROM
"HAMLET," INCLUDING THE "TO BE
OR NOT TO BE" SOLILOQUY.
AND THE UPSTATE NEW YORK
HOME OF HARRIET TUBMAN IS TO
BECOME A HISTORIC SITE RUN BY
THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE BY THE
END OF THE YEAR.
A FORMER SLAVE, TUBMAN LED
HUNDREDS OF SLAVES TO FREEDOM
ALONG THE UNDERGROUND RAILROAD
BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, TUBMAN WAS
NAMED THE NEW FACE OF THE $20
BILL.
AND THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
GOOD NIGHT.